---
title: "Automated Deployment Githubpages Hugo"
date: 2023-07-19T19:12:11-07:00
draft: false
---

I finally got this site into shape with the theme ([LoveIt](https://github.com/dillonzq/LoveIt)) chosen and configured. One of the few issues that I have with Hugo is the lack of theme standardization. There's not a lot of standardization enforced on theme developers, so there's a very wide range of theme setups and configurations out there. As a result, theme testing can be onerous when you're working on a new site. One of the really nice things about WordPress is that (since theme standardization *is* heavily enforced), changing themes is as easily as adding and activating the theme in the admin interface (which just requires a few clicks). With Hugo, you have to download the theme manually, decide whether or not to add the new theme as a Hugo module or git submodule, then figure out where in the theme configuration the options that are most important to you live. Sometimes the theme doesn't work right out of the box, and you get a broken site and have to dig around to figure out the configuration change that will get you a properly working base configuration before you can even check out how the theme looks with your content and start to play with the options. This is by far the thing that I like least about the development cycle with Hugo, and unfortunately there's no way around it, because the lack of theme standardization is at this point baked into how the project is run.

But once you choose a theme (which usually requires several rounds of the process described above, since for each candidate theme for your new site you at least have to do some downloading and basic setup, and usually on top of that you have to do some troubleshooting for a broken initial setup), the development cycle becomes a lot easier. At that point, when you're adding your own content and working with the templating engine, you're in more clearly mapped territory where there's less room for confusion. Creating content obviously depends on you and not a theme developer, and the templating is thoroughly documented within the Hugo project (unlike themes). So now I'm at the point where I'm past the worst of the hassle and can just focus on the fun part, which is making content. But there's one more issue to solve, and its an important one to get right since it will determine whether the site is easy to maintain and update in the future. That issue is how to deploy the site. The least technical way probably is to run Hugo local every time there are changes, then just upload the newly rendered .html files to a web server. I have a Dreamhost account, and I could use it for this deployment, but I was interested in using [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/), partly to learn more about it and partly because my Dreamhost plan only includes one hosted site, and I can get the site hosted for free with Pages.

With Pages, there's more than one way to handle the deployment. From what I can tell, there are three in fact:

- as described above, run Hugo locally to render content additions/updates, and then manually push the files to GitHub (either using CLI git or through the GitHub web interface.) This method works fine but doesn't take advantage of all the GitHub features that are available.